Index and Overview update (#792)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/concepts/api-overview.md

## Resource model

!!! note
    As of v1alpha2, resources are in the `gateway.networking.k8s.io` API group as
    Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs). Unqualified resource names below will implicitly

>     be in this API group. Prior to v1alpha1, the apigroup was `networking.x-k8s.io`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    be in this API group. Prior to v1alpha1, the API group was `networking.x-k8s.io`.
```

A Gateway MAY contain one or more *Route references which serve to direct
traffic for a subset of traffic to a specific service.*

### Route objects

Route objects define protocol-specific rules for mapping requests from a Gateway
to Kubernetes Services.

> As of v1alpha2, there are four Route types defined in this repo, although it's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As of v1alpha2, the API defines four Route types, although it's
```

expected that in the future implementations may create their own custom Route
types.

#### HTTPRoute

> HTTPRoute is for multiplexing HTTP or terminated HTTPS connections onto a single port or set of ports. It's intended for use in cases where you want to inspect the HTTP stream and use HTTP-level data for either routing or modification. (An example here is using HTTP Headers for routing, or modifying them in-flight).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTTPRoute is for multiplexing HTTP or terminated HTTPS connections. It's intended for use in cases where you want to inspect the HTTP stream and use HTTP-level data for either routing or modification, for example using HTTP Headers for routing, or modifying them in-flight.
```

#### TLSRoute

> TLSRoute is for multiplexing TLS connections, discriminated via SNI, onto a single port or set or ports. It's intended for where you want to use the SNI as the main routing method, and are not interested in properties of the underlying connection (such as whether or not it is HTTP).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TLSRoute is for multiplexing TLS connections, discriminated via SNI. It's intended for where you want to use the SNI as the main routing method, and are not interested in properties of the underlying connection (such as whether or not it is HTTP)
```

#### TCPRoute and UDPRoute
TCPRoute (and UDPRoute) are intended for use as a mapping between a single port or set of ports and a single backend. In this case, there is no discriminator you can use to choose different backends on the same port, so each TCPRoute really needs a different port on the listener (in general, anyway).

#### Route summary table
The "Routing Discriminator" column below refers to what information can be used to allow multiple Routes to share ports on the Listener.

|Object|OSI Layer|Routing Discriminator|TLS Support|Purpose|
|------|---------|---------------------|-----------|-------|
|HTTPRoute| Layer 7 | Anything in the HTTP Protocol | Terminated only, can be reencrypted| HTTP and HTTPS Routing|
|TLSRoute| Somewhere between layer 4 and 7| SNI or other TLS properties| Passthrough or terminated, can be reencrypted if terminated. | Routing of TLS protocols including HTTPS where inspection of the HTTP stream is not required.|

> |TCPRoute| Layer 4| None | None (but passthrough will work because the connection is forwarded) | Allows for forwarding of a TCP stream from the Listener to the Backends |

Reviewer: TCPRoute can be TLS terminated or passed through, but not multiplexed using SNI. Is that distinction too complicated for this table?

Author: I don't think so, I'll fix that up. That's why I put the "Routing discriminator" column in.

A Gateway MAY contain one or more *Route references which serve to direct
traffic for a subset of traffic to a specific service.*

> ### Route objects

Reviewer 2: Maybe "Types" or "Resources" would be better than "objects" here?

Reviewer 3: What is the k8s standard here? I've seen all three being used in this repo.

Route objects define protocol-specific rules for mapping requests from a Gateway
to Kubernetes Services.

> As of v1alpha2, the API defines four Route types, although it's
> expected that in the future implementations may create their own custom Route
> types.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As of v1alpha2, four Route types are included with the API. Custom Route types
that are implementation-specific are encouraged for other protocols. New route
types may be added to the API in future.
```

#### HTTPRoute

> HTTPRoute is for multiplexing HTTP or terminated HTTPS connections. It's intended

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
HTTPRoute is for multiplexing HTTP or TLS-terminated HTTPS connections. It's intended
```

> for use in cases where you want to inspect the HTTP stream and use HTTP-level data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for use in cases where you want to inspect the HTTP stream and use HTTP request data
```

for either routing or modification, for example using HTTP Headers for routing, or
modifying them in-flight.

#### TLSRoute
TLSRoute is for multiplexing TLS connections, discriminated via SNI. It's intended
for where you want to use the SNI as the main routing method, and are not interested

> in properties of the underlying connection (such as whether or not it is HTTP).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in properties of the higher-level protocols like HTTP.  The byte stream of the connection is proxied
without any inspection to the backend.
```

To me, underlying connections seemed like TCP. I think I'm a bit too colored by OSI.

#### TCPRoute and UDPRoute

> TCPRoute (and UDPRoute) are intended for use as a mapping between a single port or
> set of ports and a single backend. In this case, there is no discriminator you can

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TCPRoute (and UDPRoute) are intended for use for mapping one or more ports
to a single backend. In this case, there is no discriminator you can
```

use to choose different backends on the same port, so each TCPRoute really needs a

> different port on the listener (in general, anyway). You can still terminate TLS,
> and passthrough will work since the stream is passed through unchanged. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
different port on the listener (in general, anyway). You can terminate TLS in
which case the unencrypted byte stream is passed through to the backend.
You can chose to not terminate TLS, in which case the encrypted byte stream
is passed through to the backend. 
```
More explicit here because I expect major confusion here.

#### Route summary table
The "Routing Discriminator" column below refers to what information can be used to allow multiple Routes to share ports on the Listener.

|Object|OSI Layer|Routing Discriminator|TLS Support|Purpose|
|------|---------|---------------------|-----------|-------|
|HTTPRoute| Layer 7 | Anything in the HTTP Protocol | Terminated only, can be reencrypted| HTTP and HTTPS Routing|
|TLSRoute| Somewhere between layer 4 and 7| SNI or other TLS properties| Passthrough or terminated, can be reencrypted if terminated. | Routing of TLS protocols including HTTPS where inspection of the HTTP stream is not required.|

> |TCPRoute| Layer 4| None | Termination (passthrough also will work because the connection is forwarded) | Allows for forwarding of a TCP stream from the Listener to the Backends |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|TCPRoute| Layer 4| destination port | Passthrough or terminated | Allows for forwarding of a TCP stream from the Listener to the Backends |
```

> |UDPRoute| Layer 4| None | None | Allows for forwarding of a UDP stream from the Listener to the Backends. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
|UDPRoute| Layer 4| destination port | None | Allows for forwarding of a UDP stream from the Listener to the Backends. |
```

> ### Route binding

Reviewer 2: Maybe just "Attaching Routes to Gateways"

  a single Route to control application exposure simultaneously across different
  IPs, load balancers, or networks.

> *In summary, Routes attach to Gateways and Gateways choose what attachments to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*In summary, Routes attach to Gateways and Gateways choose which attachments to
```

Sorry, an extremely marginal nit :)

where those Routes can be (defaults to same namespace). If a Route wants
to attach to a Gateway in another namespace, that Gateway must *explicitly*
allow Routes from its namespace for the binding to succeed.

The Route becomes attached only when the Gateway and Route specifications intersect.
Note that this means that the binding requires bidirectional agreement between
the two objects. This is a critical part of the API's role-based structure.

#### Gateway - Route binding examples

The following `my-route` Route wants to attach to the `foo-gateway` in the
`foo-namespace` and will not bind with any other Gateways. Note that
`foo-gateway` is in a different Namespace. The `foo-gateway` must allow
bindings from HTTPRoutes in the namespace `bar-namespace`.

```yaml
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: my-route
  namespace: bar-namespace
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - kind: Gateway
    name: foo-gateway
    namespace: foo-namespace
...
```

This `foo-gateway` allows the `my-route` HTTPRoute to bind.

```yaml
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: foo-gateway
  namespace: foo-namespace
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: prod-web
    routes:
      kinds:
      - HTTPRoute
      namespaces:

>       - from: bar-namespace

Reviewer: From has to be one of "All;Selector;Same"

Author: Right, thanks, I'll fix that up.

  a single Route to control application exposure simultaneously across different
  IPs, load balancers, or networks.

*In summary, Routes attach to Gateways and Gateways choose which attachments to
allow. When a Route tries to attach to a Gateway that does not prevent it, then
the Route will bind to the Gateway. When Routes are bound to a Gateway it means
their collective routing rules are configured on the underlying load balancers
or proxies that are managed by that Gateway. Thus, a Gateway is a logical
representation of a networking data plane that can be configured through

> Routes.*

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what happened here, but I'd actually already updated a good chunk of the Route->Gateway attachment section for v1alpha2 when this page was versioned (https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/762/files#diff-bb2765a3020ed8962e5e749402a8ace4539c6218bdc621a98625ca19b2700e82R89). I think a lot of what you've done here is better than my initial work, but it may be helpful to merge some of the concepts together here.

I remember in that PR, every way I tried to reword this still sounded confusing to me. I think it may be better to remove or simplify this paragraph in favor of further explanation below.

> #### Route binding handshake

Reviewer 2: Maybe this can be merged with this: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/762/files#diff-bb2765a3020ed8962e5e749402a8ace4539c6218bdc621a98625ca19b2700e82R126-R150.

> A Route *must* select what Gateway it wants to attach to, based on the
> `parentRefs` field, which allows the selection of the Group, Kind, name,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A Route *must* specify the Gateways that can attach to itself using the
`parentRefs` field, which allows the selection of the Group, Kind, name,
```

The current text read as if "specify the gateway and you are done" while in reality it is only an "allow list".

and namespace of the object. Cluster-scoped objects can also be selected by
changing the Scope to `Cluster`. Although only Gateways are currently supported,
this is intended to allow for later extension. Additionally, the `parentRefs`
stanza is a list, so a Route may request to attach to more than one Gateway
(or other parent object).

Additionally, Gateways *may* specify what kind of Routes they support
(defaults to Routes that match the Listener protocol if not specified), and
where those Routes can be (defaults to same namespace). If a Route wants
to attach to a Gateway in another namespace, that Gateway must *explicitly*

> allow Routes from its namespace for the binding to succeed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
allow Routes from the Route's namespace for the binding to succeed.
```

So many references...

The Route becomes attached only when the Gateway and Route specifications intersect.
Note that this means that the binding requires bidirectional agreement between
the two objects. This is a critical part of the API's role-based structure.

#### Gateway - Route binding examples

The following `my-route` Route wants to attach to the `foo-gateway` in the
`foo-namespace` and will not bind with any other Gateways. Note that
`foo-gateway` is in a different Namespace. The `foo-gateway` must allow
bindings from HTTPRoutes in the namespace `bar-namespace`.

```yaml
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: my-route
  namespace: bar-namespace
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - kind: Gateway
    name: foo-gateway

>     namespace: foo-namespace

Reviewer 3: Can we move this to examples and reference it instead?

...
```

This `foo-gateway` allows the `my-route` HTTPRoute to bind.

```yaml
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: foo-gateway
  namespace: foo-namespace
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: prod-web
    routes:
      kinds:

>       - HTTPRoute

Reviewer 3: This line is not valid. It should be `kind: HTTPRoute`.
Can we please instead put this into the examples directory and reference it here so that we can ensure that such code segements are valid?

      namespaces:
      - from: Selector
        selector:
          matchLabels:
            # This label is added automatically as of K8s 1.22
            # to all namespaces
            kubernetes.io/metadata.name: bar-namespace 
```

For a more permissive example, the below Gateway will allow all HTTPRoute resources
to attach from Namespaces with the "expose-apps: true" label.

```yaml
kind: Gateway
...
spec:
  listeners:
  - name: prod-web
    routes:
      kinds:

>       - HTTPRoute

Reviewer 3: Same comment as above.
